<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      CHAPTER TWENTY
    </h2>
    <p>
      It was a quiet supper the three friends sat down to. Herbert sat narrowing
      his eyes over his thoughts, which, when the fancy took him, he scattered
      out upon the others’ silence. Lawford apparently had not yet shaken
      himself free from the sorcery of the moonlight. His eyes shone dark and
      full like those of a child who has trespassed beyond its hour for bed, and
      sits marvelling at reality in a waking dream.
    </p>
    <p>
      Long after they had bidden each other good-night, long after Herbert had
      trodden on tiptoe with his candle past his closed door, Lawford sat
      leaning on his arms at the open window, staring out across the motionless
      moonlit trees that seemed to stand like draped and dreaming pilgrims, come
      to the peace of their Nirvana at last beside the crashing music of the
      waters. And he himself, the self that never sleeps beneath the tides and
      waves of consciousness, was listening, too, almost as unmovedly and
      unheedingly to the thoughts that clashed in conflict through his brain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Why, in a strange transitory life was one the slave of these small cares?
      What if even in that dark pit beneath, which seemed to whisper Lethe to
      the tumultuous, swirling waters—what if there, too, were merely a
      beginning again, and to seek a slumbering refuge there merely a blind and
      reiterated plunge into the heat and tumult of another day? Who was that
      poor, dark, homeless ghoul, Sabathier? Who was this Helen of an impossible
      dream? Her face with its strange smile, her eyes with their still pity and
      rapt courage had taken hope away. ‘Here’s not your rest,’ cried one
      insistent voice; ‘she is the mystery that haunts day and night, past all
      the changing of the restless hours. Chance has given you back eyes to see,
      a heart that can be broken. Chance and the stirrings of a long-gone life
      have torn down the veil age spins so thick and fast. Pride and ambition;
      what dull fools men are! Effort and duty, what dull fools men are!’ He
      listened on and on to these phantom pleadings and to the rather coarse old
      Lawford conscience grunting them mercilessly down, too weary even to try
      to rest.
    </p>
    <p>
      Rooks at dawn came sweeping beneath the turquoise of the sky. He saw their
      sharp-beaked heads turn this way, that way, as they floated on outspread
      wings across the misty world. Except for the hoarse roar of the water
      under the huge thin-leafed trees, not a sound was stirring. ‘One thing,’ 
      he seemed to hear himself mutter as he turned with a shiver from the
      morning air, ‘it won’t be for long. You can, at least, poor devil, wait
      the last act out.’ If in this foolish hustling mob of the world, hired
      anywhere and anywhen for the one poor dubious wage of a penny—if it
      was only his own small dull part to carry a mock spear, and shout huzza
      with the rest—there was nothing for it, he grunted obstinately to
      himself, shout he would with the loudest.
    </p>
    <p>
      He threw himself on to the bed with eyes so wearied with want of sleep it
      seemed they had lost their livelong skill in finding it. Not the echo of
      triumph nor even a sigh of relief stirred the torpor of his mind. He knew
      vaguely that what had been the misery and madness of the last few days was
      gone. But the thought had no power to move him now. Sheila’s good sense,
      and Mr Bethany’s stubborn loyalty were alike old stories that had lost
      their savour and meaning. Gone, too, was the need for that portentous
      family gathering that had sat so often in his fancy during these last few
      days around his dining-room table, discussing with futile decorum the
      problem of how to hush him up, to muffle him down. Half dreaming, half
      awake, he saw the familiar door slowly open and, like the timely hero in a
      melodrama, his own figure appear before the stricken and astonished
      company. His eyes opened half-fearfully, and glanced up in the morning
      twilight. Their perplexity gave place to a quiet, almost vacant smile; the
      lids slowly closed again, and at last the lean hands twitched awhile in
      sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next morning he spent rummaging among the old books, dipping listlessly
      here and there as the tasteless fancy took him, while Herbert sat writing
      with serene face and lifted eyebrows at his open window. But the
      unfamiliar long S’s, the close type, and the spelling of the musty old
      books wearied eye and mind. What he read, too, however far-fetched, or
      lively, or sententious, or gross, seemed either to be of the same texture
      as what had become his everyday experience, and so baffled him with its
      nearness, or else was only the meaningless ramblings of an idle pen. And
      this, he thought to himself, looking covertly up at the spruce clear-cut
      profile at the window, this is what Herbert had called Life.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Am I interrupting you, Herbert; are you very busy?’ he asked at last,
      taking refuge on a chair in a far corner of the room.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Bless me, no; not a bit—not a bit,’ said Herbert amiably, laying
      down his pen. ‘I’m afraid the old leatherjackets have been boring you.
      It’s a habit this beastly reading; this gorge and glint and fever all at
      second-hand—purely a bad habit, like morphia, like laudanum. But
      once in, you know there’s no recovery Anyhow, I’m neck-deep, and to
      struggle would be simply to drown.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘I was only going to say how sorry I am for having left Sabathier at
      home.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘My dear fellow—’ began Herbert reassuringly.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘It was only because I wanted so very much to have your translation. I get
      muddled up with other things groping through the dictionary.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Herbert surveyed him critically. ‘What exactly is your interest now,
      Lawford? You don’t mean that my old “theory” has left any sting now?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘No sting; oh no. I was only curious. But you yourself still think it
      really, don’t you?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Herbert turned for a moment to the open window.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘I was simply trying then to find something to fit the facts as you
      experienced them. But now that the facts have gone—and they have,
      haven’t they?—exit, of course, my theory!’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘I see,’ was the cryptic answer. ‘And yet, Herbert,’ Lawford solemnly
      began again, ‘it has changed me; even in my way of thinking. When I shut
      my eyes now—I only discovered it by chance—I see immediately
      faces quite strange to me; or places, sometimes thronged with people; and
      once an old well with some one sitting in the shadow. I can’t tell you how
      clearly, and yet it is all altogether different from a dream. Even when I
      sit with my eyes open, I am conscious, as it were, of a kind of faint,
      colourless mirage. In the old days—I mean before Widderstone, what I
      saw was only what I’d seen already. Nothing came uncalled for,
      unexplained. This makes the old life seem so blank; I did not know what
      extraordinarily real things I was doing without. And whether for that
      reason or another, I can’t quite make out what in fact I did want then,
      and was always fretting and striving for. I can see no wisdom or purpose
      in anything now but to get to one’s journey’s end as quickly and bravely
      as one can. And even then, even if we do call life a journey, and death
      the inn we shall reach at last in the evening when it’s over; that, too, I
      feel will be only as brief a stopping-place as any other inn would be. Our
      experience here is so scanty and shallow—nothing more than the
      moment of the continual present. Surely that must go on, even if one does
      call it eternity. And so we shall all have to begin again. Probably
      Sabathier himself.... But there, what on earth are we, Herbert, when all
      is said? Who is it has—has done all this for us—what kind of
      self? And to what possible end? Is it that the clockwork has been wound up
      and must still jolt on a while with jarring wheels? Will it never run
      down, do you think?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Herbert smiled faintly, but made no answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘You see,’ continued Lawford, in the same quiet, dispassionate undertone,
      ‘I wouldn’t mind if it was only myself. But there are so many of us, so
      many selves, I mean; and they all seem to have a voice in the matter. What
      is the reality to this infernal dream?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘The reality is, Lawford, that you are fretting your life out over this
      rotten illusion. Be guided by me just this once. We’ll go, all three of
      us, a good ten-mile walk to-day, and thoroughly tire you out. And to-night
      you shall sleep here—a really sound, refreshing sleep. Then
      to-morrow, whole and hale, back you shall go; honestly. It’s only
      professional strong men should ask questions. Babes like you and me must
      keep to slops.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      So, though Lawford made no answer, it was agreed. Before noon the three of
      them had set out on their walk across the fields. And after rambling on
      just as caprice took them, past reddening blackberry bushes and copses of
      hazel, and flaming beech, they sat down to spread out their meal on the
      slope of a hill, overlooking quiet ploughed fields and grazing cattle.
      Herbert stretched himself with his back to the earth, and his placid face
      to the pale vacant sky, while Lawford, even more dispirited after his
      walk, wandered up to the crest of the hill.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the foot of the hill, upon the other side, lay a farm and its
      out-buildings, and a pool of water beneath a group of elms. It was vacant
      in the sunlight, and the water vividly green with a scum of weed. And
      about half a mile beyond stood a cluster of cottages and an old towered
      church. He gazed idly down, listening vaguely to the wailing of a curlew
      flitting anxiously to and fro above the broken solitude of its green hill.
      And it seemed as if a thin and dark cloud began to be quietly withdrawn
      from over his eyes. Hill and wailing cry and barn and water faded out. And
      he was staring as if in an endless stillness at an open window against
      which the sun was beating in a bristling torrent of gold, while out of the
      garden beyond came the voice of some evening bird singing with such an
      unspeakable ecstasy of grief it seemed it must be perched upon the
      confines of another world. The light gathered to a radiance almost
      intolerable, driving back with its raining beams some memory, forlorn,
      remorseless, remote. His body stood dark and senseless, rocking in the air
      on the hillside as if bereft of its spirit. Then his hands were drawn over
      his eyes. He turned unsteadily and made his way, as if through a thick,
      drizzling haze, slowly back.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘What is that—there?’ he said almost menacingly, standing with
      bloodshot eyes looking down upon Herbert.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘“That!”—what?’ said Herbert, glancing up startled from his book.
      ‘Why, what’s wrong, Lawford?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘That,’ said Lawford sullenly, yet with a faintly mournful cadence in his
      voice; ‘those fields and that old empty farm—that village over
      there? Why did you bring me here?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Grisel had not stirred. ‘The village...’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Ssh!’ she said, catching her brother’s sleeve; ‘that’s Detcham, yes,
      Detcham.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lawford turned wide vacant eyes on her. He shook his head and shuddered.
      ‘No, no; not Detcham. I know it; I know it; but it has gone out of my
      mind. Not Detcham; I’ve been there before; don’t look at me. Horrible,
      horrible. It takes me back—I can’t think. I stood there, trying,
      trying; it’s all in a blur. Don’t ask me—a dream.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Grisel leaned forward and touched his hand. ‘Don’t think; don’t even try.
      Why should you? We can’t; we MUSTN’T go back.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lawford, still gazing fixedly, turned again a darkened face towards the
      steep of the hill. ‘I think, you know,’ he said, stooping and whispering,
      ‘HE would know—the window and the sun and the singing. And oh, of
      course it was too late. You understand—too late. And once... you
      can’t go back; oh no. You won’t leave me? You see, if you go, it would
      only be all. I could not be quite so alone. But Detcham—Detcham?
      perhaps you will not trust me—tell me? That was not the name.’ He
      shuddered violently and turned dog-like beseeching eyes. ‘To-morrow—yes,
      to-morrow,’ he said, ‘I will promise anything if you will not leave me
      now. Once—’ But again the thread running so faintly through that
      inextricable maze of memory eluded him. ‘So long as you won’t leave me
      now!’ he implored her.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was vainly trying to win back her composure, and could not answer him
      at once....
    </p>
    <p>
      In the evening after supper Grisel sat her guest down in front of a big
      wood fire in the old book-room, where, staring into the playing flames, he
      could fall at peace into the almost motionless reverie which he seemed
      merely to harass and weary himself by trying to disperse. She opened the
      little piano at the far end of the room and played on and on as fancy led—Chopin
      and Beethoven, a fugue from Bach, and lovely forlorn old English airs,
      till the music seemed not only a voice persuading, pondering, and
      lamenting, but gathered about itself the hollow surge of the water and the
      darkness; wistful and clear, as the thoughts of a solitary child. Ever and
      again a log burnt through its strength, and falling amid sparks, stirred,
      like a restless animal, the stillness; or Herbert in his corner lifted his
      head to glance towards his visitor, and to turn another page. At last the
      music, too, fell silent, and Lawford stood up with his candle in his hand
      and eyed with a strange fixity brother and sister. His glance wandered
      slowly round the quiet flame-lit room.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘You won’t,’ he said, stooping towards them as if in extreme confidence,
      ‘you won’t much notice? They come and go. I try not to—to speak.
      It’s the only way through. It is not that I don’t know they’re only
      dreams. But if once the—the others thought there had been any
      tampering’—he tapped his forehead meaningly—‘here: if once
      they thought that, it would, you know, be quite over then. How could I
      prove...?’ He turned cautiously towards the door, and with laborious
      significance nodded his head at them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Herbert bent down and held out his long hands to the fire. ‘Tampering, my
      dear chap: That’s what the lump said to the leaven.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Yes, yes,’ said Lawford, putting out his hand, ‘but you know what I mean,
      Herbert. Anything I tried to do then would be quite, quite hopeless. That
      would be poisoning the wells.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      They watched him out of the room, and listened till quite distinctly in
      the still night-shaded house they heard his door gently close. Then, as if
      by consent, they turned and looked long and questioningly into each
      other’s faces.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Then you are not afraid?’ Herbert said quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Grisel gazed steadily on, and almost imperceptibly shook her head.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘You mean?’ he questioned her; but still he had again to read her answer
      in her eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Oh, very well, Grisel,’ he said quietly, ‘you know best,’ and returned
      once more to his writing.
    </p>
    <p>
      For an hour or two Lawford slept heavily, so heavily that when a little
      after midnight he awoke, with his face towards the uncurtained window,
      though for many minutes he lay brightly confronting all Orion, that from
      blazing helm to flaming dog at heel filled high the glimmering square, he
      could not lift or stir his cold and leaden limbs. He rose at last and
      threw off the burden of his bedclothes, and rested awhile, as if freed
      from the heaviness of an unrememberable nightmare. But so clear was his
      mind and so extraordinarily refreshed he seemed in body that sleep for
      many hours would not return again. And he spent almost all the remainder
      of the lagging darkness pacing softly to and fro; one face only before his
      eyes, the one sure thing, the one thing unattainable in a world of
      phantoms.
    </p>
    <p>
      Herbert waited on in vain for his guest next morning, and after wandering
      up and down the mossy lawn at the back of the house, went off cheerfully
      at last alone for his dip. When he returned Lawford was in his place at
      the breakfast-table. He sat on, moody and constrained, until even
      Herbert’s haphazard talk trickled low.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘I fancy my sister is nursing a headache,’ he said at last, ‘but she’ll be
      down soon. And I’m afraid from the looks of you, Lawford, your night was
      not particularly restful.’ He felt his way very heedfully. ‘Perhaps we
      walked you a little too far yesterday. We are so used to tramping that—’ 
      Lawford kept thoughtful eyes fixed on the deprecating face.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘I see what it is, Herbert—you are humouring me again. I have been
      wracking my brains in vain to remember what exactly DID happen yesterday.
      I feel as if it was all sunk oceans deep in sleep. I get so far—and
      then I’m done. It won’t give up a hint. But you really mustn’t think I’m
      an invalid, or—or in my second childhood. The truth is,’ he added,
      ‘it’s only my FIRST, come back again. But now that I’ve got so far, now
      that I’m really better, I—’ He broke off rather vacantly, as if
      afraid of his own confidence. ‘I must be getting on,’ he summed up with an
      effort, ‘and that’s the solemn fact. I keep on forgetting I’m—I’m a
      ratepayer!’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Herbert sat round in his chair. ‘You see, Lawford, the very term is little
      else than Double-Dutch to me. As a matter of fact Grisel sends all my
      hush-money to the horrible people that do the cleaning up, as it were. I
      can’t catch their drift. Government to me is merely the spectacle of the
      clever, or the specious, managing the dull. It deals merely with the
      physical, and just the fringe of consciousness. I am not joking. I think I
      follow you. All I mean is that the obligations—mainly tepid, I take
      it—that are luring you back to the fold would be the very ones that
      would scare me quickest off. The imagination, the appeal faded: we’re
      dead.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lawford opened his mouth; ‘TEMPORARILY tepid,’ he at last all but coughed
      out.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Oh yes, of course,’ said Herbert intelligently. ‘Only temporarily. It’s
      this beastly gregariousness that’s the devil. The very thought of it
      undoes me—with an absolute shock of sheepishness. I suddenly realise
      my human nakedness: that here we are, little better than naked animals,
      bleating behind our illusory wattles on the slopes of—of infinity.
      And nakedness, after all, is a wholesome thing to realize only when one
      thinks too much of one’s clothes. I peer sometimes, feebly enough, out of
      my wool, and it seems to me that all these busybodies, all these
      fact-devourers, all this news-reading rabble, are nothing brighter than
      very dull-witted children trying to play an imaginative game, much too
      deep for their poor reasons. I don’t mean that YOUR wanting to go home is
      anything gregarious, but I do think THEIR insisting on your coming back at
      once might be. And I know you won’t visit this stuff on me as anything
      more than just my “scum,” as Grisel calls the fine flower of my maiden
      meditations. All that I really want to say is that we should both be more
      than delighted if you’d stay just as long as it will not be a bore for you
      to stay. Stay till you’re heartily tired of us. Go back now, if you MUST;
      tell them how much better you are. Bolt off to a nerve specialist. He’ll
      say complete rest—change of scene, and all that. They all do.
      Instinct via intellect. And why not take your rest here? We are such
      miserably dull company to one another it would be a greater pleasure to
      have you with us than I can say. I mean it from the very bottom of my
      heart. Do!’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Lawford listened. ‘I wish—,’ he began, and stopped dead again.
      ‘Anyhow, I’ll go back. I am afraid, Herbert, I’ve been playing truant. It
      was all very well while—To tell you the truth I can’t think QUITE
      straight yet. But it won’t last for ever. Besides—well, anyhow, I’ll
      go back.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Right you are,’ said Herbert, pretending to be cheerful. ‘You can’t
      expect, you really can’t, everything to come right straight away. Just
      have patience. And now, let’s go out and sit in the sun. They’ve mixed
      September up with May.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      And about half an hour afterwards he glanced up from his book to find his
      visitor fast asleep in his garden chair.
    </p>
    <p>
      Grisel had taken her brother’s place, with a little pile of needlework
      beside her on the grass, when Lawford again opened his eyes under the rosy
      shade of a parasol. He watched her for a while, without speaking.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘How long have I been asleep?’ he said at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      She started and looked up from her needle.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘That depends on how long you have been awake,’ she said, smiling. ‘My
      brother tells me,’ she went on, beginning to stitch, ‘that you have made
      up your mind to leave us to-day. Perhaps we are only flattering ourselves
      it has been a rest. But if it has—is that, do you think, quite
      wise?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      He leant forward and hid his face in his hands. ‘It’s because—it’s
      because it’s the only “must” I can see.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘But even “musts”—well, we have to be sure even of “musts,” haven’t
      we? Are YOU?’ She glanced up and for an instant their eyes met, and the
      falling water seemed to be sounding out of a distance so remote it might
      be but the echo of a dream. She stooped once more over her work.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Supposing,’ he said very slowly, and almost as if speaking to himself,
      ‘supposing Sabathier—and you know he’s merely like a friend now one
      mustn’t be seen talking to—supposing he came back; what then?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Oh, but Sabathier’s gone: he never really came. It was only a fancy—a
      mood. It was only you—another you.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Who was that yesterday, then?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      She glanced at him swiftly and knew the question was but a venture.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Yesterday?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Oh, very well,’ he said fretfully, ‘you too! But if he did, if he did,
      come really back: “prey” and all?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘What is the riddle?’ she said, taking a deep breath and facing him
      brightly.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Would MY “must” still be HIS?’ The face he raised to her, as he leaned
      forward under the direct light of the sun, was so colourless, cadaverous
      and haggard, the thought crossed her mind that it did indeed seem little
      more than a shadowy mask that but one hour of darkness might dispel.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘You said, you know, we did win through. Why then should we be even
      thinking of defeat now?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘“We”!’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Oh no, you!’ she cried triumphantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘You do not answer my question.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Nor you mine! It WAS a glorious victory. Is there the ghost of a reason
      why you should cast your mind back? Is there, now?’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘Only,’ said Lawford, looking patiently up into her face, ‘only because I
      love you’: and listened in the silence to the words as one may watch a
      bird that has escaped for ever and irrevocably out of its cage, steadily
      flying on and on till lost to sight.
    </p>
    <p>
      For an instant the grey eyes faltered. ‘But that, surely,’ she began in a
      low voice, still steadily sewing, ‘that was our compact last night—that
      you should let me help, that you should trust me just as you trusted the
      mother years ago who came in the little cart with the shaggy dusty pony to
      the homesick boy watching at the window. Perhaps,’ she added, her fingers
      trembling, ‘in this odd shuffle of souls and faces, I AM that mother, and
      most frightfully anxious you should not give in. Why, even because of the
      tiredness, even because the cause seems vain, you must still fight on—wouldn’t
      she have said it? Surely there are prizes, a daughter, a career, no end!
      And even they gone—still the self undimmed, undaunted, that took its
      drubbing like a man.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      ‘I know you know I’m all but crazed; you see this wretched mind all
      littered and broken down; look at me like that, then. Forget even you have
      befriended me and pretended—Why must I blunder on and on like this?
      Oh, Grisel, my friend, my friend, if only you loved me!’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      Tears clouded her eyes. She turned vaguely as if for a hiding-place. ‘We
      can’t talk here. How mad the day is. Listen, listen! I do—I do love
      you—mother and woman and friend—from the very moment you came.
      It’s all so clear, so clear: that, and your miserable “must,” my friend.
      Come, we will go away by ourselves a little, and talk. That way. I’ll meet
      you by the gate.’ 
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2HCH0021" id="link2HCH0021">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
